Adds Migrate Elasticsearch with minimal downtime page (#2533)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/migrate/migrate-data-between-elasticsearch-clusters-with-minimal-downtime.md

---

> navigation_title: Migrate Elasticsearch data with minimal downtime

Reviewer: @shainaraskas I think the goal of this article is to provide an answer to all our customers asking for "zero-downtime" migrations. Incremental snapshots are the technology enabling it, not the end goal. I am totally ok with changing the title but I would like to keep the "downtime" part in there :)

> navigation_title: Migrate Elasticsearch data with minimal downtime

Author: I did a keyword search, and to optimize this page for SEO, we need to keep `Elasticsearch` in the title.

> navigation_title: Migrate Elasticsearch data with minimal downtime

Reviewer: Got it! I think for the nav title @shainaraskas's suggestion makes sense as we are already under the "migrate" section.

applies_to:
  stack: 
  deployment:
    ess: 
    ece: 

>     eck: 

Reviewer: it's the first time for me contributing so bear with me :) why is it an issue? this holds for basically every kind of elasticsearch deployment: self-managed, ECK, ... should we mention either?

>     eck: 

Reviewer 2: you could hypothetically just remove the `deployment` node entirely, because `stack` is a label that represents any deployment of the versioned stack (i.e. anything that isn't serverless). I'd actually recommend that over this change. 

the `stack` label has a tooltip on it that clarifies this, and we'll be expanding it with even more info soon.

products:
  - id: elasticsearch
  - id: cloud-hosted
  - id: cloud-enterprise
---

> # Migrate {{es}} data with minimal downtime [migrate-elasticsearch-data-with-minimal-downtime]

Reviewer 3: Wouldn’t it make sense to include an empty line below each heading to keep the formatting consistent with other docs?

Reviewer: done, thanks!

> # Migrate {{es}} data with minimal downtime [migrate-elasticsearch-data-with-minimal-downtime]

Reviewer: in my opinion, no, as they are a technology. customers won't google for "migrate ES incremental snapshots", they will look for "migrate ES zero downtime" IMHO

> # Migrate {{es}} data with minimal downtime [migrate-elasticsearch-data-with-minimal-downtime]

Author: According to Google Search Console, the most impressions are coming from this keyword string: `how to migrate elasticsearch with minimal downtime?`

To make it title-ly, I went with `Migrate Elasticsearch data with minimal downtime`. 

`zero downtime` has two more impressions (24 vs 22), but for elastic cloud clusters. Is this maybe the same? If so, I'll change it!

When moving your data and services from one {{es}} cluster to another, such as to {{ech}}, {{ece}}, new on-premises hardware, or any other {{es}} environment, you can use incremental snapshots to minimize downtime. 

Migrating with incremental snapshots is useful when you want to:

* Migrate all data in your indices and configurations, such as roles and {{kib}} dashboards, from the old cluster to a new cluster.
* Ensure data ingestion, such as {{ls}} or {{beats}}, and data consumption, such as applications using {{es}} as a backend, seamlessly migrate to the new cluster.
* Maintain data consistency and minimize disruption.  

> ## How incremental snapshots works [how-incremental-snapshots-work]

Reviewer: agreed - added this part:

This mechanism enables you to copy the vast majority of your data into the new cluster ahead of time, making the future transition from the old cluster to your new one as quick as possible, since only few segments will need to go through the snapshot-and-restore procedure upon cutover.

Incremental snapshots capture only the data that has changed since the previous snapshot. 

After the initial full snapshot, each subsequent snapshot contains only the differences, which makes the snapshot process faster over time. When you restore snapshots, only the missing data segments are copied from the snapshot repository to the cluster local storage, speeding up restores when the changes between snapshots are small.

When you incrementally create and restore snapshots, you can repeatedly synchronize the new cluster with the old cluster by taking and restoring multiple snapshots before performing the final cutover.

## Recommended migration timeline [recommended-migration-timeline]
Complete the minimal-downtime migration using incremental snapshots. While the exact sequence may differ depending on your infrastructure and operational requirements, you can use the recommended migration timeline as a reliable baseline that you can adapt. Adjust the steps and times to fit your own operational needs.

> 1. **09:00**: Take the initial full snapshot of the old cluster. You can also take the initial full snapshot the day before.

Author: I don't want to send users off to other docs in the middle of the page, which is why I included the list of relevant docs at the bottom

4. **10:15**: Perform the final cutover.
    1. In the old cluster, pause indexing or set indices to ready-only.
    2. Take a final snapshot. 
    3. Restore the snapshot to the new cluster. 
    4. Change ingestion and querying to the new cluster. 
    5. Open the indices in the new cluster. 

## Incremental snapshot limitations [incremental-snapshot-limitations]
While incremental snapshots allow efficient migration with minimal downtime, consider the limitations when planning your migration.

Limitations include the following:
* **Storage requirements** – Sufficient repository storage is required, and usage can grow based on snapshot frequency and data volume.
* **Network overhead** – Transferring snapshots across networks, regions, or providers can be time-consuming and incur costs.
* **Version compatibility** – Old and new clusters must use compatible {{es}} versions. To check if your cluster versions are compatible, check [Snapshot compatibility](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore.md#snapshot-restore-version-compatibility).

> * **Custom integrations** – Some custom integrations that directly use the {{es}} API can require additional handling during the cutover from the old cluster to the new cluster.

Reviewer 2: do we have a source or guidance for this?

Reviewer: Maybe a reference to e.g. the Elasticsearch Java client library?

* **Resource usage** – Initial and incremental snapshot and restore operations can be resource-intensive, potentially affecting cluster performance.

> ## Additional topics [additional-incremental-snapshot-topics]

Reviewer 2: consider integrating most of these into the body.

### Snapshot and restore
* For more information about snapshot and restore concepts, check [Snapshot and Restore](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore.md).
* To learn how to configure snapshot repositories before taking or restoring snapshots, check [Manage snapshot repositories](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/manage-snapshot-repositories.md).
* To learn how to restore snapshots to clusters other than the source, check [Restore to a different cluster](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/restore-snapshot.md#restore-different-cluster).

### Cluster and index management
* For details on setting indices to read-only to safely pause indexing during migration, check [Index lifecycle actions: Read-only](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-lifecycle-actions/ilm-readonly.md).

### Data ingestion
* For information about using {{ls}} for data ingestion, check the [{{ls}} documentation](logstash://reference/index.md).
* For information about using Beats for data ingestion, check the [{{beats}} documentation](beats://reference/index.md).

> ### Alternative migration methods
> * To learn about reindexing from remote clusters as an alternative migration method, check [Reindex documents API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-reindex).

Reviewer 2: we have this topic here we should use instead. we might also want to call out [indexing from the source](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/docs-content/pull/2533/manage-data/migrate#ec-index-source).

```suggestion
### Alternative migration methods
* To learn about reindexing from remote clusters as an alternative migration method, check [Reindex from a remote cluster](/manage-data/migrate.md#ech-reindex-remote).
```

### Elastic Cloud environments
* To explore {{ech}} environments for migration targets, check the [{{ech}} documentation](/deploy-manage/deploy/elastic-cloud/cloud-hosted.md).

> * To explore {{ece}} environments for migration targets, check the [{{ece}} documentation](/deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-enterprise.md).

Reviewer 2: these links are too high level. I'd remove them
